A Guardian Angel
I can still picture the little Dilaram bazaar as I first saw it 20 years ago. Hanging on the hem of Aunt
Mariam’s sari, I had followed her along the sunlit length of the dusty road and up the wooden
staircase to her rooms above the barber’s shop.
There were number of children playing in the road, and they all stared at me. They must have
wondered what my dark, black haired aunt was doing with a strange child who was fairer than most.
She did not bother to explain my presence, and it was several weeks before the bazaar people learned
something of my origins.
Aunt Mariam, my mother’s younger sister, was at that time about 30. She came from a family of
Christian converts, originally Muslims of Rampur. My mother had married an Englishman, who died
while I was still a baby, she herself was not a strong woman, and fought a losing battle with
tuberculosis while bringing me up.
My sixth birthday was approaching when she died, in the middle of the night, without my being
aware of it, and I woke up to experience, for a day, all the terrors of abandonment.
But that same evening Aunt Mariam arrived. Her warmth, worldliness and carefree chatter gave me
the reassurance I needed so badly. She slept beside me that night and next morning, after the funeral,
took me with her to her rooms in the bazaar. This small flat was to be my home for the next year-anda-half.
Before my mother’s death I had seen very little of my aunt. From the remarks I occasionally
overheard, it appeared that Aunt Mariam had, in some indefinable way, disgraced the family. My
mother was cold towards her, and I could not help wondering why because a more friendly and
cheerful extrovert than Aunt Mariam could hardly be encountered.
There were other relatives, but they did not come to my rescue with the same readiness. It was only
later, when the financial issues became clearer, that innumerable uncle and aunts appeared on the
scene.
The age of six is the beginning of an interesting period in the life of a day, and the months I spent
with Aunt Mariam are not difficult to recall. She was a joyous, bubbling creature — a force of nature
rather than a woman — and every time I think of her I am tempted to put down on paper some aspect
of her conversation, or her gestures, or her magnificent physique.
She was a strong woman, taller than most men in the bazaar, but this did not detract from her
charms. Her voice was warm and deep, her face was a happy one, broad and unlined, and her teeth
gleamed white in the dark brilliance of her complexion.
She had large soft breasts, long arms and broad thighs. She was majestic, and at the same time she
was graceful. Above all, she was warm and full of understanding, and it was this tenderness of hers
that overcame resentment and jealousy in other women.
She called me Ladla, her darling, and told me she had always wanted to look after me. She had
never married. I did not, at that age, ponder the reasons for her single state. At six, I took all things for
granted and accepted Mariam for what she was — my benefactress and guardian angel.
Her rooms were untidy compared with the neatness of my mother’s house. Mariam reveled in
untidiness. I soon grew accustomed to the topsy-turviness of her rooms and found them comfortable.
Beds (hers a very large and soft one) were usually left unmade, while clothes lay draped over chairs
and tables.
A large watercolour hung on a wall, but Mariam’s bodice and knickers were usually suspended
from it, and I cannot recall the subject of the painting. The dressing table was a fascinating place,
crowded with all kinds of lotions, mascaras, paints, oil and ointments.
Mariam would spend much time sitting in front of the mirror running a comb through her long black
hair, or preferably having young Mulia, a servant girl, comb it for her. Though a Christian, my aunt
retained several Muslim superstitions, and never went into the open with her hair falling loose.
Once Mulia came into the rooms with her own hair open. ‘You ought not to leave your hair open.
Better knot it,’said Aunt Mariam.
‘But I have not yet oiled it, Aunty,’ replied Mulia. ‘How can I put it up?’
‘You are too young to understand. There are jinns — aerial spirits — who are easily attracted by
long hair and pretty black eyes like yours.’
‘Do jinns visit human beings, Aunty?’
‘Learned people say so. Though I have never seen a jinn myself, I have seen the effect they can
have on one.’
‘Oh, do tell about them,’said Mulia.
‘Well, there was once a lovely girl like you, who had a wealth of black hair,’said Mariam. ‘Quite
unaccountably she fell ill, and in spite of every attention and the best medicines, she kept getting
worse. She grew as thin as a whipping post, her beauty decayed, and all that remained of it till her
dying day was her wonderful head of hair.’
It did not take me long to make friends in the Dilaram bazaar. At first I was an object of curiosity,
and when I came down to play in the street both women and children would examine me as though, I
was a strange marine creature.
‘How fair he is,’ observed Mulia.
‘And how black his aunt,’ commented the washerman’s wife, whose face was fiddled with the
marks of smallpox.
‘His skin is very smooth,’ pointed out Mulia, who took considerable pride in having been the first
to see me at close quarters. She pinched my cheeks with obvious pleasure.
‘His hair and eyes are black,’ remarked Mulia’s aging mother.
‘Is it true that his father was an Englishman?’
‘Mariam-bi says so,’said Mulia. ‘She never lies.’
‘True,’said the washerman’s wife, ‘Whatever her faults — and they are many — she has never
been known to lie.’
My aunt’s other ‘faults’ were a deep mystery to me; nor did anyone try to enlighten me about them.
Some nights she had me sleep with her, other nights (I often wondered why) she gave me a bed in
an adjoining room, although I much preferred remaining with her — especially since, on cold January
nights, she provided me with considerable warmth.
I would curl up into a ball just below her soft tummy. On the other side, behind her knees, slept
Leila, an enchanting Siamese cat given to her by an American businessman whose house she would
sometimes visit. Every night, before I fell asleep, Mariam would kiss me, very softly, on my closed
eyelids. I never fell asleep until I had received this phantom kiss.
At first I resented the nocturnal visitors that Aunt Mariam free-quently received, their arrival meant
that I had to sleep in the spare room with Leila. But when I found that these people were impermanent
creatures, mere ships that passed in the night, I learned to put up with them.
I seldom saw those men, though occasionally I caught a glimpse of a beard or an expensive
waistcoat or white pyjamas. They did not interest me very much, though I did have a vague idea that
they provided Aunt Mariam with some sort of income, thus enabling her to look after me.
Once, when one particular visitor was very drunk, Mariam had to force him out of the flat. I
glimpsed this episode through a crack in the door. The man was big, but no match for Aunt Mariam.
She thrust him out onto the landing, and then he lost his footing and went tumbling downstairs. No
damage was done, and the man called on Mariam again a few days later, very sober and contrite, and
was re-admitted to my aunt’s favours.
Aunt Mariam must have begun to worry about the effect these comings and goings might have on
me, because after a few months she began to make arrangements for sending me to a boarding school
in the hills.
I had not the slightest desire to go to school and raised many objections. We had long arguments in
which she tried vainly to impress upon me the desirability of receiving an education.
‘To make a living, my Ladla,’she said, ‘you must have an education.’
‘But you have no education,’ I said, ‘and you have no difficulty in making a living!’
Mariam threw up her arms in mock despair. ‘Ten years from now I will not be able to make such a
living. Then who will support and help me? An illiterate young fellow, or an educated gentleman?
When I am old, my son, when I am old …’
Finally I succumbed to her arguments and agreed to go to a boarding school. And when the time
came for me to leave, both Aunt Mariam and I broke down and wept at the railway station.
I hung out of the window as the train moved away from the platform, and saw Mariam, her bosom
heaving, being helped from the platform by Mulia and some of our neighbours.
My incarceration in a boarding school was made more unbearable by the absence of any letters
from Aunt Mariam. She could write little more than her name.
I was looking forward to my winter holidays and my return to Aunt Mariam and the Dilaram
bazaar, but this was not to be. During my absence there had been some litigation over my custody, and
my father’s relatives claimed that Aunt Mariam was not a fit person to be a child’s guardian.
And so when I left school, it was not to Aunt Mariam’s place that I was sent, but to a strange family
living in a railway colony near Moradabad. I remained with these relatives until I finished school, but
that is a different story.
I did not see Aunt Mariam again. The Dilaram bazaar and my beautiful aunt and the Siamese cat all
became part of the receding world of my childhood.
I would often think of Mariam, but as time passed she became more remote and inaccessible in my
memory. It was not until many years later, when I was a young man, that I visited the Dilaram bazaar
again. I knew from my foster parents that Aunt Mariam was dead. Her heart, it seemed, had always
been weak.
I was anxious to see the Dilaram bazaar and its residents again, but my visit was a disappointment.
The place had disappeared; or rather, it had been swallowed up by a growing city.
It was lost in the complex of a much larger market which had sprung up to serve a new government
colony. The older people had died, and the young ones had gone to colleges or factories or offices in
different towns. Aunt Mariam’s rooms had been pulled down.
I found her grave in the little cemetery on the town’s outskirts. One of her more devoted admirers
had provided a handsome gravestone, surmounted by a sculptured angel. One of the wings had broken
off, and the face was chipped, which gave the angel a slightly crooked smile.
But in spite of the broken wing and the smile, it was a very ordinary stone angel and could not hold
a candle to my Aunt Mariam, the very special guardian angel of my childhood.
